hello everyone welcome to IELTS academic
writing task 1 today we're going to look
at line and pie charts so how to write
the academic task 1 when you give it two
different types of charts together okay
this is an example of what you might get
if you're given two types of charts
together so here we can see we have four
pie charts at the top and we have a line
graph here at the bottom so what you'll
have to do is respond to the task by
describing the pie charts and the line
graph doing the comparison within each
of these and also between each of them
so we're going to have a look we're
going to break it down and have a look
at it step by step how we complete this
task and at the end of this class I'm
going to give you a chance to practice
the the skills and the tips that we
cover so this is the end product as you
can see we have four paragraphs each one
of them has a particular function so the
introduction just introduces the the
chance it just set tells us what the
chart are about the general overview is
just a sentence or two just generally
giving us the main trends then we move
into a detailed description with data
and statistics and then we end with a
summary so what do you have to do for
writing task 1 you have to summarize the
information by selecting and reporting
the main features and making comparisons
where relevant so let's walk through
these instructions step by step
summarizing selecting reporting and
making comparisons so summarize it means
let's tell the main idea of the chart
what are they about
are they about food consumption oil
consumption the amount of television
watched per hour the amount of
activities done in schools okay so the
main idea of the charts they need to
select select means choose the most
important interesting or noticeable
features for example the most or the
least you then need to report these
features so introduce them and give
their overview so these are what we call
the main trends you also need to compare
these features by explaining what the
data represents and providing statistics
from the graph and then summarize again
by restating the main features so the
four things you have to do for this task
that you're given in the instructions is
summarized select report and compare I'm
going to show you how to do each of
these things using a specific structure
so you need to write a 150 word response
in 20 minutes and here is the secret
formula here's a general overview of it
so it contains an introduction a general
overview a detailed description and a
summary let's look at each of these
parts in more detail so the introduction
is a paraphrase of the prompt okay
you're given the charts and then you're
given a prompt a prompt basically tells
you what the charts show for your
introduction all you need to do is a
phrase this I'm going to show you how
the next part is a general overview this
is where you select the main features or
the most noticeable gems and you report
them you don't give any data at this
stage you would just say something like
overall we can see that
data showed an increase over time or a
decrease over time that's it then we
move into the detail description this is
where you would say the doctor showed an
increase over time of 50% you can state
started at 50 and ended at 100 so this
is where you support the information
that you gave in the general overview by
adding statistics and also comparing
data you'll then finish with a summary
this is where you Sarai's the main
trends and link the two charts and we're
going to have a look at how we do that
step one writing your introduction you
rewrite or paraphrase the task
description or the prompt for example
here are prompt the charts below show
the budget spent on restaurants and home
cooking and the number of meals per year
on far food and sit-down restaurants
over a 40-year period here are your
instructions summarize the information
by selecting and reporting the main
features and make comparisons where
relevant okay so what tolls that tells
us that the charts show the budget spent
on restaurants and home cooking as well
as the number of meals per year on fast
food and sit-down restaurants so let's
just have a quick look here what did the
pie charts show the percentage of food
budget spent on restaurant meals which
is in blue and the percentage of food
budget spent on home cooking which is in
brown okay what does the line graph show
the line graph shows fast food versus
sit-down restaurants and here it tells
us it's the number of meals per year so
the number of sit-down restaurant meals
is in yellow and the number of fast food
meals is in blue
so here we have generally a comparison
the pie charts between eating at home
and eating out then the line graph says
okay we're going to look at just eating
out and we're going to compare fast
foods to restaurants okay so a model
answer for our introduction or a
paraphrase of the prompt would be the
charts below we can change that to the
data provided because charts are all
about data you're providing data instead
of the verb show we can say gives
information about what about the money
spent on eating out and eating at home
instead of the budget spent on
restaurants and home cooking
so restaurants I said eating out and
home cooking I changed it to eating at
home the last part of the prompt says
and the number of meals per year on fast
food and sit-down restaurants over a 40
period forty year period I paraphrase
that into a dwell as a comparison
between the number of fast food rested
and restaurant meals over four decades
so instead of over a 40-year period I
said over four decades okay
so I've basically taken the question and
I've broken it down and by breaking it
down it makes it much easier for me to
paraphrase it and I should end up with
one sentence of one sentence paraphrase
- I have rewritten the question so here
we have the original and now put all of
our paraphrase parts together and here I
have my paraphrase
so this is my introduction we're now
going to move on to second part of your
response which would be a general
overview this is where you first have to
identify and then describe the main
trends so let's have another look here
we have the percentage of food budget or
money spent on restaurants in blue home
cooking in brown and then a comparison
between the number of fast food meals in
blue and sit-down restaurants in yellow
so the first thing we want to do is look
at the pie charts let's ignore the line
graphs for now we just need focus on one
at a time so let's look at the pie
charts what are the main trends what do
you notice about the blue the data
represented in blue okay and then what
do you notice about the data represented
in brown to answer this question we need
to look at what happened to the data did
it increase or decrease over time so the
percentage of money spent on restaurant
meals did what what happened to that
data the money spent are the percentage
of money spent on restaurant meals
increased weaken seats went from ten to
fifteen to thirty five to fifty so
that's a clear increase what happened to
the percentage of money spent on
home-cooked meals
well the percentage of money spent on
home cooked meals decreased so these are
your main trends the main trends that
you identify will become your general
overview your paragraph two this is only
the first half of our overview because
we also have a line graph
so we've identified the two main trends
of the pie charts which is an increase
in money spent on restaurants and a
decrease in the money spent on
home-cooked food so putting those
sentences together
I have significantly the percentage of
money spent on restaurant meals
increased over the time period while the
percentage of money spent on home-cooked
meals decreased okay we need to finish
the oath of you now by also giving or
describing the main trends of the line
graph so let's have a look at the line
graph what are the main trends to answer
this question we need to happened to the
data did it increase or decrease over
time and if so how much rapidly slightly
consistently so the number of fast food
meals did what significantly the number
of fast food meals rose significantly
now I could say increased but I already
used it when I was talking about the
data in the pie charts so that have
increased I'll use the synonym rose then
what happened to the number of sit-down
restaurant meals they also rose but they
rose more steadily okay we can see that
fast food rose significantly those quite
a large steep increase whereas although
sit-down meals increased it was more of
a steady increase so these are our main
trends again they will form our general
overview so that sentence would be the
number of fast food meals rose
significantly whereas the number of
sit-down restaurant meals rose steadily
so now we've identified the main trends
of the pie charts and the line graph and
we need to put those two together so we
need to look first at the first chart
ask ourselves what happened to the data
and write one to two sentences then we
need to look at the second chart ask
ourselves what happened to the data that
it increased decrease a lot a little and
write two sentences when it put those
sentences together for our general
overview paragraph which will look like
this significantly the percentage of
resent on restaurant meals increased
over the time period while the
percentage of money spent on home-cooked
meals decreased we got that from the pie
charts then the number of fast food
meals rose significantly whereas the
number of sit-down restaurant meals rose
steadily and we've got that from the
line graph we put all together into one
general overview paragraph now we have
that information we've identified the
main trends or what happened to the data
now we move on to the detailed
description this is where we actually
add the statistics we add the numbers
and we compare them so how do we do that
we don't just pick random statistics or
random numbers we have to use the trends
that we discussed in the general
overview and build upon them by adding
statistics the sentences in the detailed
overview should follow the same order as
the sentences in the general overview
this means that our writing will be
coherent logical and easy to follow so
we need to review what our main points
were the money spent on restaurant meals
increased the money spent on home-cooked
meals decreased the number of fast food
meals rose significantly the number of
sit-down restaurant meals rose steadily
okay so these were the trends that we
identified and this were the order in
which we presented them in our general
overview so we're going to take those
ideas use the same
order and elaborate now in our next
paragraph so we liberate these points
and we follow the same order so on the
left here I've just put the main points
of the general overview so that we can
remember what they were because to write
our detailed description we need to
match those so the first point was
percentage of money spent on restaurant
meals increased which is this data here
so now I want to support that by giving
more detail the increase in money spent
on fast-food was significant rising 40
percent from 10 percent in 1970 to 50
percent in 2000 so you notice that I
didn't say what happened in every year I
didn't say in 1970 was 10 percent and
then it was 15 percent in 1980 and then
it rose by 20 percent in 1990 I don't
need to say every single thing that
happens I'm just picking what's
significant significant that it rose 40
percent over the entire period from 10
to 50 okay number one we don't have it's
only 150 words so we don't have enough
word count to describe every single
thing and also we need to show that we
have selected the relevant data because
that's what they told us in our
instructions we need to select relevant
data so that's relevant then we need to
follow on with the second point which
was the percentage of money spent on
home-cooked meals decreased and we can
see we can see that so supporting that
with a detailed description conversely
people spent less on home cooking which
started at 90 percent in 1970 and ended
in 50 percent in 2000 so here i've given
evidence for how home cook meals
decrease
and given evidence I've said that it
started at 90 and ended at 50 next point
is the number of fast food meals rose
significantly okay so now I'm looking at
part of the line graph and I need to
give evidence for that in my detailed
description so my evidence is fast food
meals became more popular maizing
steadily from 20% in 1970 to almost 30%
in 1980 so 30% Lodge eating and then
skyrocketing to almost 90 percent in
2000 so why do I select that data well
it was interesting that it started here
but it wasn't a consistent rise
okay it was here steadily arose a little
bit from 20 to 30 and then from 30 it
when I words to almost 90 okay then the
number of sit-down restaurant meals rose
steadily I need to give evidence for
that the number of sit-down meals also
increased but more steadily rising from
20% in 1970 to 50% in 2000 okay I don't
need to say what happened here in here
it's not really that important okay
there was nothing significant there
wasn't a huge rise or huge fall it was
just steady increase okay so I can just
describe where it started and where it
ended
so it's all about selecting the relevant
data and choosing what's important to
write about so you can see that I've
actually followed the same order the
information from the general overview in
my detailed description but I've just
added the data so putting it together I
have this paragraph
okay so I've started off with my
introduction where I paraphrased the
tasks description I then looked at the
pie chart and the line graph and I asked
myself what happened to the data did it
rise or did it fall and I described that
then I went into my detailed overview
where I gave evidence of the rises and
the Falls by quoting statistics by
selecting most relevant and important
statistics and now I'm moving on to my
summary this is the end this is the last
sentence so this is where I summarized
the main trends but I also may make a
link between the two charts okay so for
my summary I need to ask myself a
question what's the overall trend among
the pie charts the overall trend among
the pie charts are that people spent an
increasing amount of money on eating out
yep then I need to ask myself what's the
overall trend among the line graphs well
we can see that the money spent on
eating out rose and then how did the pie
chart and the line graph relate to each
other most of the money that was spent
but most of that money was spent on fast
food meals so here I have more much more
people started eating out and out of the
eating out between fast food and
restaurant fast food was the most
popular so this is our summary putting
these sentences together I end up with
this
[Music]
so here is my final prep my introduction
which is my paraphrase general overview
where I talk about an increase and a
decrease and my detailed description
okay and then ending up with a summary
and a link between two charts so let's
recap
introduction paraphrase the prompt and
if you have to break it up if it's if it
looks like it's too long or too much
break up the ideas and then paraphrase
them individually you then want to write
your general overview but before you do
that you have to ask yourself what do I
see what is the data doing is it rising
is it falling is it changing okay and
then select those features and write
them then you need to write your
detailed description you're using the
features that you selected in the
general overview and then you're adding
statistics to support that and compare
the data and then last part is your
summary summarizing the main trends so
when you get this task you really need
to look you know if you're given a task
that has two parts a pie chart a line
graph look at each part separately what
does the first part show you what
happened to the data and remember don't
report everything okay it's not a
description of every single number or
every year you're just choosing the most
significant okay let's practice I have
another one here for you it's a little
bit easier because it's just one of each
the charts below show the typical daily
demand for electricity and what it's
used for summarize the information by
selecting and reporting the main
features and make comparisons where
relevant so line graph shows us typical
daily demand for electricity in units
and this numbers here we're what they're
for so don't worry about those who don't
really need them and we have units of
electricity used in winter units of
electricity used in summer so that's how
much electricity was used overall then
the pie chart tells us what that
electricity was used for we have heating
rooms and water we have ovens kettles
washing machines of appliances we have
lighting TV radio vacuum cleaners food
mixes and electric tools so I would like
you I'm going to give you one minute to
write an introduction paraphrasing the
prompt here's the prompt okay now here
are your instructions you don't need to
paraphrase those just the prompt okay so
you've got one minute to do that and
your time starts now
[Music]
when you're ready you can type your
introduction into the chat I'll have a
look at them
[Music]
okay guys really good answers I've had a
look at them all very nice summaries
here's my example the charts below show
electricity consumption in terms of
demand and usage but all of yours were
great so each one was different and and
very work well written okay now we want
to move on to the next part part 2 which
is writing our general overview now
remember we want to first look at the
line graph and then we're going to look
at the pie chart so we're going to
separate them so that we don't get
confused so firstly identify the main
trends in the line graph what is the
trend here so I'll give you just one
minute so just looking at the line graph
[Music]
okay let's have a look so there's a
little bit of an uncertainty in the
responses about the main trends of the
line graph so let's have a look
basically there was more electricity
usage in winter than in summer yep so
consistently the electricity was always
higher in winter so this is one trend
the second trend we can say that both
seasons showed a steady fluctuation so a
fluctuation meaning arise a fall arise
or fall arise a fall which is what
happened in winter and also in summer a
full arise or fall arise and a fall so
this is what we call a fluctuation but
these are not severe fluctuations
they're not going up and down and up and
down suddenly they're quite steady okay
so here I have identified two trends in
the line graph first trend is more
electricity was used in winter than in
summer and the second trend is both
seasons fluctuated so here are my
transformer line graph next identify the
main trends in the pie chart so what do
you notice what the remember just just
to select the most important
unnoticeable feature
good you guys got it so heating rooms
and water made up the highest amount of
electricity usage excellent okay you
said you all got the main trend there
I've also just added another trend that
I noticed was that there was a
similarity between two categories here
so lighting and electronics shared an
equal amount of usage okay so if you
wanted to add that as an extra you could
but definitely the most important
feature is that heating made up the
majority of all electricity usage so
well done so now we want to put these
trends together for our general overview
so what do we have here more electricity
was used in winter than in summer both
seasons showed a steady fluctuation
heating rooms and water made up the
highest amount of electricity usage and
lighting in electronics shared an equal
amount so these are the trends that I
selected and that I chose to report on
now we want to take those and use them
to write our detailed description okay
so you're going to have to decide which
statistics you're going to use to
support your trends so this might take a
little bit longer I'm going to give you
about five minutes for this
you
[Music]
okay guys good good job so let's have a
look at what I had written though both
seasons showed a fluctuation electricity
usage in summer stayed below 2000 units
so electricity usage in summer didn't
rise above 2000 units that was the
maximum in winter it fluctuated from
30,000 at the lowest to just under
50,000 at the highest okay so here I
just mentioned where it started and then
the highest point heating comprised the
majority of electricity usage at 52.5%
and then I also mentioned because I have
some words left over and some extra time
that lighting and electronics both made
up 30% of total electricity usage and
household appliances was just higher at
seventeen point five now you don't
really have to put that if you if your
task was short or your response was
short and you had a few extra words you
could again the main thing to talk about
would be this the most noticeable
feature now be careful guys when you are
you talking about data some of you write
long sentences and put lots of different
data in one sentence now for the reader
that makes it very confusing so with
this part of the task you want to be
careful to use simple sentences and just
talk about you know one statistic at a
time per sentence otherwise it's too
much to take in and it becomes confusing
so you can see here that I mentioned
most both seasons showed a fluctuation
but last summer stayed below 20,000
units full stop new sentence in winter
it fluctuated at 30,000 and the lowest
to just under 50,000 at the highest so
here although I've included two
statistics I've done so in a way that
it's a comparison of one idea if you're
putting together summer and winter and
all in one sentence then it sort of
starts to lose coherence so here again
one statistic per sentence one statistic
per sentence so unless you are able to
write clear sentences that include more
than one statistic separate them into
into individual sentences okay so now
you've actually written the introduction
you've written your general overview and
you've written written your detailed
summary so this is the last part of the
task summarized the main trends and
compare the charts okay one sentence
only one to two sentences
[Music]
so guys just a tip in the summary
because there are two charts there are
actually two trends that we need to
summarize here
[Music]
yeah okay well done so here's my summary
electricity demand fluctuated in winter
and summer but you did in winter was
higher so that's the main point of the
line graph is that winter has the
highest usage of electricity and then by
far most of that electricity is used for
heating rooms and water okay so there I
am I've just summarized the main trends
so here is my answer putting it all
together so I'll give you a few moments
to read that
you
okay do you have any questions so far or
at all because actually we're at the end
so do you have any questions about the
structure how to identify trends how to
select data
[Music]
okay so among you should try to divide
the sentences as I said try to keep them
simple because when we're writing about
data using lots of numbers it can get
confusing if we have too much in one
sentence so try to keep them simple okay
with the last paragraph try to keep it
one to two sentences if it's if you just
get one graph so in some writing task 1
you get just a line graph or just a pie
chart in that case your last paragraph
can't be one sentence but in this case
it's a double chart question so
therefore you're summarizing two things
so you can write to quest to census in
the last paragraph okay Stephanie
writing task 1 is all about answering or
describing a chart or a graph or data
writing task 2 is an essay so you won't
be analyzing charts or graphs or writing
about data so it's a different type of
task and that's a different webinar
okay so Mars I'm going to go back to
your question just give me a moment so
Martha is asking about the first one
that we looked at if there is no data
given do we need to guess now there's
always going to be data Glenn you never
guess you're only describing what you
see so here we see that there's 10%
which means that although no data is
given for the brown we know that it's
going to be 90% okay here although it
tells us the blue is 50 no data is given
for the brown but we all know that that
means it would be 50% so it's not a
guess it's it's common sense
okay so although it doesn't state the
data here we just use our knowledge of
mathematics to figure it out okay does
that answer your question
[Music]
okay good
all right everyone thank you very much
for joining me hopefully I've
demystified the IELTS writing task one a
little bit for you
it's very formulaic so you've only got
twenty minutes if you do have to get
something like this
break it down look at the first chart
ask yourself what is it showing me what
do I see what's the pattern here so
actually it's all about recognizing a
pattern and then simplify it then you
want to go into detail keeping your
sentences simple and short and then
summarizing the main trends at the end
so 20 minutes 150 words to counter your
words you don't have time to go through
and count 150 words so a quick quick tip
to do that or to get an estimate is to
just count the number
words on your first line and then count
the amount of lines you have and
multiply them multiply the number of
words on your first line say ten by the
amount of lines you have and that will
give you an estimate if you've only got
about 150 or a little bit less it's not
going to be enough it needs to be a
hundred fifty or more okay which means
that you can probably go back to
paragraph three and add a bit of detail
okay that's it thank you very much and
thanks Stephanie even though this is
whisper twister brawn class but
hopefully you learned something valuable
all right see you guys next week bye